Title: Predictability of fetal pulmonary artery Doppler on neonatal outcomes in pregnant women with gestational diabetes mellitus.

Abstract: 1. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2025 Jan-Dec;65(1):e70018. doi: 10.1111/cga.70018.

Predictability of fetal pulmonary artery Doppler on neonatal outcomes in 
pregnant women with gestational diabetes mellitus.

Ezveci H(1), Doğru Ş(2), Yaman FK(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Maternal and Fetal Medicine, Necmettin Erbakan University (NEU) 
Faculty of Medicine, Konya, Turkey.
(2)Konya City Hospital, Konya, Turkey.

This study examined the impact of blood glucose-regulated gestational diabetes 
(GDM) on fetal pulmonary artery Doppler parameters. This prospective 
case-control study was performed at a tertiary university hospital. The study 
cohort comprised GDM patients with controlled blood glucose levels and a healthy 
control group. Acceleration time/ejection time (At/Et) of the main pulmonary 
artery, right pulmonary artery, and left pulmonary artery Doppler parameters 
were assessed and contrasted between the two groups. The study comprised 90 
patients, with 30 in the gestational diabetes mellitus group focused on blood 
sugar regulation and 60 in the healthy control group. No statistically 
significant difference was observed between the two groups regarding the common 
main pulmonary artery At/Et (p = 0.465), right pulmonary artery At/Et 
(p = 0.237), and left pulmonary artery At/Et (p = 0.283). No statistically 
significant difference was noted between the two groups regarding APGAR scores 
and blood gas parameters of the newborns (p < 0.05). No statistically 
significant difference was observed in fetal pulmonary artery Doppler parameters 
(p < 0.05) when gestational diabetes mellitus cases were classified based on the 
utilization of diet and insulin for blood sugar regulation. The pulmonary artery 
Doppler parameters in fetuses of pregnant women with gestational diabetes 
mellitus and controlled blood sugar levels are comparable to those of healthy 
controls. Moreover, dietary habits and insulin administration for glycemic 
control did not alter pulmonary artery Doppler metrics. The findings suggest 
that well-managed gestational diabetes mellitus, irrespective of the treatment 
modality, do not substantially influence the fetal pulmonary artery dynamics.

© 2025 The Author(s). Congenital Anomalies published by John Wiley & Sons 
Australia, Ltd on behalf of Japanese Teratology Society.

DOI: 10.1111/cga.70018
PMCID: PMC12242718
PMID: 40635636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest.