Title: Heterogeneity in the association between a dietary pattern high in fat, sugar, and sodium and adverse pregnancy outcomes by maternal characteristics: a US pregnancy cohort study.

Abstract: 1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2025 Jul 11:S0002-9165(25)00394-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajcnut.2025.07.005. Online ahead of print.

Heterogeneity in the association between a dietary pattern high in fat, sugar, 
and sodium and adverse pregnancy outcomes by maternal characteristics: a US 
pregnancy cohort study.

Bodnar LM(1), Kirkpatrick SI(2), Yu YH(3), Kennedy E(4), Parisi SM(5), Naimi 
AI(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, 
and Reproductive Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Electronic address: lbodnar@pitt.edu.
(2)School of Public Health Sciences, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: "Precision nutrition" aims to recognize variation in response to 
dietary patterns to inform tailored advice based on behavioral, social, 
environmental, genetic, and metabolic factors.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify characteristics of pregnant individuals that 
modify the associations between a high fat, sugar, and sodium diet and poor 
perinatal outcomes.
DESIGN: We used data from 8054 participants in the Nulliparous Pregnancy 
Outcomes Study: monitoring mothers-to-be (8 US medical centers, 2010‒2013), a 
prospective cohort study. Usual periconceptional dietary intake was assessed at 
6‒13 weeks gestation using a food frequency questionnaire. The exposure was a 
high fat, sugar, and sodium dietary pattern versus all other diet patterns. The 
outcome was a composite of one or more perinatal outcomes: preeclampsia, 
gestational diabetes, preterm birth, or small-for-gestational-age birth. We used 
the doubly-robust learner, which enables the use of machine learning to identify 
maternal characteristics that modify the effect of the dietary pattern on the 
composite outcome.
RESULTS: Approximately 29% had a dietary pattern that was high in fat, sugar, 
and sodium. One quarter had any adverse pregnancy outcome. The 
confounder-adjusted association between a high fat, sugar, and sodium dietary 
pattern and the risk of the adverse composite pregnancy outcome was stronger 
among certain subgroups of the cohort than others, including individuals with a 
higher BMI, lower socioeconomic status, and non-Hispanic Black race/ethnicity. 
For instance, compared with other diet patterns, intake of a diet high in fat, 
sugar, and sodium was associated with 5.9 excess cases per 100 pregnancies 
(adjusted risk difference 0.059 (95% confidence interval 0.012, 0.11) among 
individuals living in a high-poverty neighborhood, but 2.3 excess cases per 100 
pregnancies (0.023; 95% CI -0.011, 0.057) among those residing in a low-poverty 
neighborhood.
CONCLUSIONS: This work may provide clues that contribute to a deeper 
understanding of the heterogeneity in dietary responses in pregnancy.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajcnut.2025.07.005
PMID: 40653273

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests ☒ The authors declare 
the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered 
as potential competing interests: Lisa Bodnar reports financial support was 
provided by National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. If there 
are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the 
work reported in this paper. Ashley Isaac Naimi reports financial support was 
provided by National Institutes of Health. If there are other authors, they 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.