Title: Early prediction of gestational diabetes mellitus based on systematically selected multi-panel biomarkers and clinical accessibility-a longitudinal study of a multi-racial pregnant cohort.

Abstract: 1. BMC Med. 2025 Jul 18;23(1):430. doi: 10.1186/s12916-025-04258-w.

Early prediction of gestational diabetes mellitus based on systematically 
selected multi-panel biomarkers and clinical accessibility-a longitudinal study 
of a multi-racial pregnant cohort.

Yang J(1)(2)(3), Cao Y(4)(5), Qian F(6)(7), Grewal J(8), Sacks DB(9), Chen 
Z(10), Tsai MY(11), Chen J(#)(5), Zhang C(#)(12)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Global Center for Asian Women's Health, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Bia-Echo Asia Center for Reproductive Longevity & Equality (ACRLE), Yong Loo 
Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Department of Statistics, School of Science, Minzu University of China, 
Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology & Informatics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Center for Sustainable Finance Innovation, Nanyang Business School, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singapore, Singapore.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Division of Population Health Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(10)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(11)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(12)Global Center for Asian Women's Health, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. obgzc@nus.edu.sg.
(13)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. obgzc@nus.edu.sg.
(14)Bia-Echo Asia Center for Reproductive Longevity & Equality (ACRLE), Yong Loo 
Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 
obgzc@nus.edu.sg.
(15)Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, 
MA, USA. obgzc@nus.edu.sg.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Early identification of high-risk women is critical for preventing 
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). We aimed to improve early prediction of GDM 
using multiple panels of cardiometabolic biomarkers assessed in early and 
mid-pregnancy, considering clinical accessibility.
METHODS: In a US study of 2802 pregnant individuals, we assessed 91 
cardiometabolic biomarkers at 10-14 (random blood) and 15-26 (fasting) 
gestational weeks (GW) in 107 GDM cases and 214 controls. Candidate biomarkers 
were categorized by clinical accessibility from high to low: group I (clinically 
accessible tests like HbA1c, lipids), group II (clinically accessible biomarkers 
upon request like insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis markers, adipokines), 
and group III (specialty lab-required targeted metabolomics: amino acids (AAs) 
and phospholipid fatty acids (FAs)). At each visit, we constructed a full model 
incorporating all candidate biomarkers and conventional predictors. We built 
alternative models utilizing different groups of biomarkers considering clinical 
accessibility. Variable selection was performed to retain variables with a p 
value < 0.10 for a parsimonious model. Model performance was evaluated by area 
under receiver operating characteristics curve (AUC), proportion of cases 
followed (PCF, %) and proportion needed to follow (PNF, %), and decision curve 
analysis.
RESULTS: A full model comprising conventional predictors, clinical and 
non-clinical cardiometabolic biomarkers, and metabolomic markers achieved the 
highest discriminative accuracy (AUC: 0.842 at 10-14 GW, 0.829 at 15-26 GW). The 
addition of novel biomarkers increased PCF and decreased PNF, suggesting 
increased clinical utility. For example, at 10-14 GW, 69.5% of GDM cases are 
expected to be detected from women whose risk is above the 80% percentile 
estimated by the full model vs. 49.1% by the conventional model. Additionally, 
46.1% of women identified as being at the highest risk by the full model are 
expected to account for 90.0% of GDM cases vs. 71.1% by the conventional model. 
Decision curve analysis showed that models incorporating novel biomarkers 
performed better than the conventional model including glucose, and the full 
model at 10-14 GW had the highest net benefit, overall.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggested that a selected panel of cardiometabolic 
biomarkers using early-pregnancy random plasma samples predicted GDM comparably 
to those using mid-pregnancy fasting samples.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-025-04258-w
PMCID: PMC12275388
PMID: 40682053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The study protocol was reviewed and approved by institutional 
review boards at NICHD and each of the clinical sites. Written informed consent 
was obtained from all the participants. The IRB approval number is NICHD 
(09-CH-N152). Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: The 
authors declare no competing interests.