Title: Pregnancy-associated acute kidney injury - consensus report of the 32nd Acute Disease Quality Initiative workgroup.

Abstract: 1. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2025 Jul 18. doi: 10.1038/s41581-025-00979-6. Online ahead of
 print.

Pregnancy-associated acute kidney injury - consensus report of the 32nd Acute 
Disease Quality Initiative workgroup.

Nelson-Piercy C(1), Srisawat N(2)(3), Kashani K(4)(5), Lumlertgul N(2)(3), 
Murugan R(6), Rhee H(7), Chakravarthi R(8), Surapaneni T(9), Acharya A(10), 
Ankawi G(11), Bramham K(12), Cerda J(13), Clark K(12), Claure-Del Granado R(14), 
Gowrishankar S(15), Luyckx V(16), Menon S(17), Poli-de-Figueiredo CE(18), 
Ramachandran R(19), Sahay M(20), Samavedam S(21), Shemies R(22), Shetty MS(23), 
Wiles K(24), Wium L(25), Wu VC(26), Yadla M(27), Ronco C(28), Mehta RL(29), 
Ostermann M(30).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetric Medicine, Guy's & St Thomas' Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(2)Excellence Centre for Critical Care Nephrology, King Chulalongkorn Memorial 
Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Centre of Excellence for Critical Care Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(6)Program for Critical Care Nephrology, Department of Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Busan, 
Republic of Korea.
(8)Department of Nephrology, Yasodha Hospitals, Hyderabad, India.
(9)Department of Obstetric Medicine, Fernandez Hospitals, Hyderguda, Hyderabad, 
India.
(10)Division of Nephrology, Jacobi Medical Center, New York City Health and 
Hospital Corporation (NYCHHC), Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York 
City, NY, USA.
(11)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(12)Department of Women & Children's Health, School of Life Course & Population 
Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
(13)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Albany Medical College, 
Albany, NY, USA.
(14)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Hospital Obrero No 2 - Caja 
Nacional de Salud, Cochabamba, Bolivia.
(15)Department of Pathology, Apollo Health City, Hyderabad, India.
(16)Department of Nephrology, University Children's Hospital, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(17)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Lucile Packard Children's 
Hospital and Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(18)Division of Nephrology, School of Medicine, Pontifical Catholic University 
of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(19)Department of Nephrology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India.
(20)Department of Nephrology, Osmania Medical College and General Hospital, 
Hyderabad, India.
(21)Ramdev Rao Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(22)Mansoura Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt.
(23)Department of Nephrology, JSS Medical College, JSSAHER, Mysuru, India.
(24)Department of Women's Health, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(25)Department of Obstetric Medicine, King's College Hospital NHS Trust, London, 
UK.
(26)Department of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan 
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(27)Department of Nephrology, Gandhi Medical College, Hyderabad, India.
(28)Department of Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation, San Bortolo 
Hospital, International Renal Research Institute of Vicenza, Vicenza, Italy.
(29)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
USA.
(30)Department of Critical Care, King's College London, Guy's & St Thomas' 
Hospital, London, UK. Marlies.Ostermann@gstt.nhs.uk.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) during pregnancy and the postpartum period, known as 
pregnancy-associated AKI (PrAKI), is an important health concern and driver of 
health inequity worldwide. Causes of PrAKI include sepsis, autoimmune disorders 
and pregnancy-specific pathologies such as hypertensive disorders. Common risk 
factors include maternal comorbidities and use of nephrotoxic medications. PrAKI 
accounts for a substantial proportion of maternal mortality and morbidity, 
particularly in low-income and middle-income countries, and may also adversely 
affect the fetus, resulting in death, premature birth and small for gestational 
age. In this Consensus Statement, we present recommendations on the causes, 
diagnosis, management and follow-up of PrAKI from the 32nd Acute Disease Quality 
Initiative meeting, which involved international experts in obstetrics, 
midwifery, obstetric medicine, paediatrics, internal medicine, anaesthesiology, 
nephrology and critical care. We suggest that pregnant and postpartum women at a 
high risk of PrAKI should be identified to enable prevention, surveillance and 
timely diagnosis. The multidisciplinary management of these patients should be 
tailored to treat their specific causes of PrAKI to optimize short-term and 
long-term neonatal and maternal outcomes. Further observational and 
interventional studies are needed to address existing gaps in knowledge of PrAKI 
and improve maternal and fetal outcomes.

© 2025. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41581-025-00979-6
PMID: 40681846

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: C.N.-P. has received 
speakers fees from UCB and Sanofi unrelated to this manuscript. R.M. is a 
consultant for Baxter, Vantive and Fresenius, and has received grants from the 
US National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) and 
Vantive, unrelated to this study. M.O. has received research funding from Baxter 
and BioMérieux. K.K. declares patents for direct GFR measurement and net 
ultrafiltration calculator; consulting fees and travel support from Baxter 
Healthcare; research grants from Google; speaker honorarium from Nikkiso 
Critical Care Medical Supplies (Shanghai); funding from NIDDK grant; 
and research grants to his institution from the following companies: Fresenius, 
Spectral, ExThera, Renibus, Novartis and Astute Medical. K.B. has received 
consulting fees from GSK, Vertex, Maze, AstraZeneca and Bayer; honoraria from 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim and Vertex; and industry grants from 
AstraZeneca and Roche. R.C.-D.G. has received speaker honoraria from Nova 
Biomedical and Baxter Healthcare. R.L.M. has received consulting fees from Am 
Pharma, Baxter, Fresenius, Guard Therapeutics, Abbott, Sphingotec, Mallinckrodt, 
Novartis, Idorsia, Renasym, Abiomed and Alexion. S.M. has received research 
funding from the Gerber Foundation. The other authors declare no competing 
interests.