Title: Preexisting Diabetes and Pregnancy: An Endocrine Society and European Society of Endocrinology Joint Clinical Practice Guideline.

Abstract: 1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2025 Jul 13:dgaf288. doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgaf288. 
Online ahead of print.

Preexisting Diabetes and Pregnancy: An Endocrine Society and European Society of 
Endocrinology Joint Clinical Practice Guideline.

Wyckoff JA(1), Lapolla A(2), Asias-Dinh BD(3), Barbour LA(4), Brown FM(5)(6), 
Catalano PM(7), Corcoy R(8)(9)(10), Di Renzo GC(11)(12), Drobycki N(13), 
Kautzky-Willer A(14), Murad MH(15), Stephenson-Gray M(16), Tabák AG(17)(18), 
Weatherup E(1), Zera C(19)(20), Singh-Ospina N(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and 
Diabetes/Podiatry, Domino's Farms, University of Michigan, Lobby C, Suite 1300, 
24 Frank Lloyd Wright Dr., PO Box 451, Ann Arbor, MI 48106-0451, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Padova, 35100 Padova, Italy.
(3)Pharmacy Practice and Translational Research, University of Houston, Houston, 
TX 77204-5000, USA.
(4)Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism Department, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine and Anschutz Medical Campus, 1635 N. Aurora Court, Aurora, CO 
80045, USA.
(5)Joslin Diabetes Center, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck St, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.
(7)Reproductive Endocrinology Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Department of 
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, 275 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 
02114, USA.
(8)Endocrinology and Nutrition Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
Carrer de Sant Quintí, 08041 Barcelona, Spain.
(9)CIBER-BBN, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Calle Monforte de Lemos, 3-5, 28029 
Madrid, Spain.
(10)Department of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Plaça Cívica, 
08193 Bellaterra, Spain.
(11)PREIS International School, 50139 Firenze, Italy.
(12)Meyer Children's University Hospital, 50139 Firenze, Italy.
(13)Endocrinology Division, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center of 
Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(14)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(15)Mayo Clinic Evidence-Based Practice Center, Harwick Building, Room 2-54, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(16)National Health Service, Cardiff, UK.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine and Oncology and Institute of Preventive 
Medicine and Public Health, Semmelweis University Faculty of Medicine, 
Semmelweis University of Medicine, H-1083 Budapest, Hungary.
(18)UCL Brain Sciences, University College London, London W1T 7NF, UK.
(19)Obstetrics Gynecology & Reproductive Biology Department, Harvard Medical 
School, Shattuck St, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(20)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Biology, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(21)Division of Endocrinology, University of Florida, PO Box 100226, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

BACKGROUND: Preexisting diabetes (PDM) increases the risk of maternal and 
perinatal mortality and morbidity. Reduction of maternal hyperglycemia prior to 
and during pregnancy can reduce these risks. Despite compelling evidence that 
preconception care (PCC), which includes achieving strict glycemic goals, 
reduces the risk of congenital malformations and other adverse pregnancy 
outcomes, only a minority of individuals receive PCC. Suboptimal pregnancy 
outcomes demonstrated in real-world data highlight the need to further optimize 
prenatal glycemia. New evolving technology shows promise in helping to achieve 
that goal. Dysglycemia is not the only driver of poor pregnancy outcomes in PDM. 
The increasing impact of obesity on pregnancy outcomes underscores the 
importance of optimal nutrition and management of insulin sensitizing 
medications during prenatal care for PDM.
OBJECTIVE: To provide recommendations for the care of individuals with PDM that 
lead to a reduction in maternal and neonatal adverse outcomes.
METHODS: The Guideline Development Panel (GDP) composed of a multidisciplinary 
panel of clinical experts, along with experts in guideline methodology and 
systematic literature review, identified and prioritized 10 clinically relevant 
questions related to the care of individuals with diabetes before, during and 
after pregnancy. The GDP prioritized randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 
evaluating the effects of different interventions (eg, PCC, nutrition, treatment 
options, delivery) during the reproductive life cycle of individuals with 
diabetes, including type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM). Systematic reviews queried electronic databases for publications related 
to these 10 clinical questions. The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology was used to assess the certainty 
of evidence and develop recommendations. The approach incorporated perspectives 
from 2 patient representatives and considered patient values, costs and 
resources required, acceptability and feasibility, and impact on health equity 
of the proposed recommendations.
RESULTS: In individuals with diabetes mellitus who have the possibility of 
becoming pregnant, we suggest asking a screening question about pregnancy 
intention at every reproductive, diabetes, and primary care visit. Screening for 
pregnancy intent is also suggested at urgent care/emergency room visits when 
clinically appropriate (2 | ⊕OOO). This was suggested based on indirect evidence 
demonstrating a strong association between PCC and both reduced glycated 
hemoglobin (HbA1c) at the first prenatal visit and congenital malformations.In 
individuals with diabetes mellitus who have the possibility of becoming 
pregnant, we suggest use of contraception when pregnancy is not desired (2 | 
⊕⊕OO). This was suggested based on indirect evidence in women with diabetes, 
where PCC-including contraception as a key component-showed a clinically 
significant association with improvements in first-trimester HbA1c and the rate 
of congenital malformations, together with indirect evidence from the general 
population regarding the reduction of unplanned pregnancies and pregnancy 
terminations with the use of contraception.In individuals with T2DM, we suggest 
discontinuation of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP-1RA) before 
conception rather than discontinuation between the start of pregnancy and the 
end of the first trimester (2 | ⊕OOO). This was suggested based on limited data 
on risk of exposure to GLP-1RA receptor agonists during pregnancy.In pregnant 
individuals with T2DM already on insulin, we suggest against routine addition of 
metformin (2 | ⊕OOO). This was suggested based on the GDP judgment that the 
benefit of adding metformin to insulin to achieve decrease in rates of large for 
gestational age infants did not outweigh the potential harm of increasing the 
risk of small for gestational age infants or adverse childhood outcomes related 
to changes in body composition.In individuals with PDM, we suggest either a 
carbohydrate-restricted diet (<175 g/day) or usual diet (>175 g/day) during 
pregnancy (2 | ⊕OOO). This was suggested based on the GDP judgment that the 
available evidence was limited and very indirect, resulting in significant 
uncertainty about the net benefits or harms. As such, the evidence was 
insufficient to support a recommendation either for or against a carbohydrate 
intake cutoff of 175 g/day.In pregnant individuals with T2DM, we suggest either 
the use of a continuous glucose monitor (CGM) or self-monitoring of blood 
glucose (SMBG) (2 | ⊕OOO). There is lack of direct evidence supporting 
superiority of CGM use over SMBG for T2DM during pregnancy. There is indirect 
evidence supporting improved glucometrics with the use of CGM for individuals 
with T2DM outside of pregnancy, substantial improvements in neonatal outcomes 
for individuals with T1DM using CGM during pregnancy and the potential for 
decreasing adverse pregnancy outcomes with improved glucometrics in individuals 
with T2DM.In individuals with PDM using a CGM, we suggest against the use of a 
single 24-hour CGM target <140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) in place of standard-of-care 
pregnancy glucose targets of fasting <95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L), 1-hour postprandial 
<140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L), and 2-hour postprandial < 120 mg/dL (6.7 mmol/L) (2 | 
⊕OOO). This was suggested based on indirect evidence that associated adverse 
pregnancy outcomes with a fasting glucose > 126 mg/dL (7 mmol/L).In individuals 
with T1DM who are pregnant, we suggest the use of a hybrid closed-loop pump 
(pump adjusting automatically based on CGM) rather than an insulin pump with CGM 
(without an algorithm) or multiple daily insulin injections with CGM (2 | ⊕OOO). 
This was suggested based on a meta-analysis of RCTs which demonstrated 
improvement in glucometrics with increased time in range (MD +3.81%; CI -4.24 to 
11.86) and reduced time below range (MD -0.85%; CI -1.98 to 0.28) with the use 
of hybrid closed-loop pump technology.In individuals with PDM, we suggest early 
delivery based on risk assessment rather than expectant management (2 | ⊕OOO). 
This was suggested based on indirect evidence that risks may outweigh benefits 
of expectant management beyond 38 weeks gestation and that risk assessment 
criteria may be useful to inform ideal delivery timing.In individuals with PDM 
(including those with pregnancy loss or termination), we suggest postpartum 
endocrine care (diabetes management), in addition to usual obstetric care (2 | 
⊕OOO). As the postpartum period frequently overlaps with preconception, this was 
suggested based on indirect evidence demonstrating a strong association between 
PCC and both reduced HbA1c at the first prenatal visit and congenital 
malformations.
CONCLUSION: The data supporting these recommendations were of very low to low 
certainty, highlighting the urgent need for research designed to provide high 
certainty evidence to support the care of individuals with diabetes before, 
during, and after pregnancy. Investment in implementation science for PCC is 
crucial to prevent significant mortality and morbidity for individuals with PDM 
and their children. RCTs to further define glycemic targets in pregnancy and 
refinement of emerging technology to achieve those targets can lead to 
significant reduction of harm and in the burden of diabetes care. Data on 
optimal nutrition and obesity management in pregnancy are lacking. More research 
on timing of delivery in women with PDM is also needed.

This article has been co-published with permission in The Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology & Metabolism and European Journal of Endocrinology. © The Authors 
2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgaf288
PMID: 40652453