VOL. 131, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2018 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY e49
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is one of the most common medical complications of pregnancy. However, 
debate continues to surround the diagnosis and treatment of GDM despite several recent large-scale studies address-
ing these issues. The purposes of this document are the following: 1) provide a brief overview of the understanding of 
GDM, 2) review management guidelines that have been validated by appropriately conducted clinical research, and 
3) identify gaps in current knowledge toward which future research can be directed.
NUMBER 190, FEBRUARY 2018 
(Replaces Practice Bulletin Number 180, July 2017)
Background
Definition and Prevalence
Gestational diabetes mellitus is a condition in which 
carbohydrate intolerance develops during pregnancy. 
Gestational diabetes that is adequately controlled with-
out medication is often termed diet-controlled GDM or 
class A1GDM. Gestational diabetes mellitus that requires 
medication to achieve euglycemia is often termed class 
A2GDM. Because many women do not receive screening 
for diabetes mellitus before pregnancy, it can be chal-
lenging to distinguish GDM from preexisting diabetes. 
However, it has been estimated that in 2009, 7% of preg-
nancies were complicated by any type of diabetes and that 
approximately 86% of these cases represented women 
with GDM (1). Additionally, the prevalence of GDM var-
ies in direct proportion to the prevalence of type 2 diabetes 
in a given population or racial or ethnic group. Caucasian 
women generally have the lowest rates of GDM. There is 
an increased prevalence of GDM among Hispanic, African 
American, Native American, and Asian or Pacific Islander 
women (2). Gestational diabetes also increases with the 
same risk factors seen for type 2 diabetes such as obesity 
and increased age (3). With a greater prevalence of obe- 
sity and sedentary lifestyles, the prevalence of GDM 
among reproductive-aged women is increasing globally.
Maternal and Fetal Complications
Women with GDM have a higher risk of developing 
preeclampsia (9.8% in those with a fasting glucose 
less than 115 mg/dL and 18% in those with a fast-
ing glucose greater than or equal to 115 mg/dL) and 
undergoing a cesarean delivery (25% of women with 
GDM who require medication and 17% of women with 
diet-controlled GDM underwent cesarean delivery ver-
sus 9.5% of controls) (4, 5). Furthermore, women with 
GDM have an increased risk of developing diabetes 
(predominantly type 2 diabetes) later in life. It is esti-
mated that up to 70% of women with GDM will develop 
diabetes within 22–28 years after pregnancy (6–8). The 
progression to diabetes also is influenced by race, ethnic-
ity, and obesity. For example, 60% of Latin American 
women with GDM may develop type 2 diabetes within 
5 years of their index pregnancy (9).
The offspring of women with GDM are at increased 
risk of macrosomia, neonatal hypoglycemia, hyperbiliru-
binemia, shoulder dystocia, and birth trauma. There also 
is an increased risk of stillbirth, although how much this 
ACOG PRACTICE BULLETIN
Clinical Management Guidelines for Obstetrician–Gynecologists
INTERIM UPDATE
INTERIM UPDATE: This Practice Bulletin is updated as highlighted to reflect a limited, focused change to clarify and pro-
vide additional information on the pharmacologic treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus.
Committee on Practice Bulletins—Obstetrics. This Practice Bulletin was developed by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
Committee on Practice Bulletins—Obstetrics with the assistance of Aaron B. Caughey, MD, PhD, and Mark Turrentine, MD.

e50 Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY
factors, including those with a prior history of GDM 
(see Box 1) (16, 20). However, the best test for early 
GDM or type 2 diabetes screening is not clear. The test-
ing used to diagnose type 2 diabetes in nonpregnant indi-
viduals (ie, a fasting blood glucose followed by a 75-g 
glucose load and a 2-hour plasma glucose measurement) 
could be used for early pregnancy screening (21). Many 
obstetricians or obstetric care providers use the two-
step screening process that is used for GDM and start 
with a 50-g OGTT. The American Diabetes Association 
(ADA) has noted that measurement of hemoglobin A1C 
also can be used, but it may not be suitable for use alone 
because of decreased sensitivity compared with OGTT 
approaches (20). Even if the results of early testing are 
negative, GDM screening still is recommended at 24–28 
weeks of gestation because of the large proportion of 
women who had negative early pregnancy screening but 
who will go on to develop GDM (22). In women who 
have positive 50-g screening test results, but negative 
follow-up test results early in pregnancy, it is common 
to use the follow-up test at 24–28 weeks of gestation 
without repeating the 50-g screening test.
The two-step approach to testing for GDM that is 
commonly used in the United States is based on first 
screening with the administration of a 50-g oral glucose 
solution followed by a 1-hour venous glucose determi-
nation. Women whose glucose levels meet or exceed an 
institution’s screening threshold then undergo a 100-g, 
3-hour diagnostic OGTT. Gestational diabetes mellitus 
is most often diagnosed in women who have two or more 
abnormal values on the 3-hour OGTT.
Institutional screening thresholds for the 1-hour 
glucose challenge vary from 130 mg/dL to 140 mg/dL, 
with a range of sensitivities and specificities reported. 
However, there are no randomized trials that have 
examined whether one cutoff is more effective than oth-
ers. Data regarding the ideal threshold value to screen 
for gestational diabetes in order to improve pregnancy 
outcomes also are insufficient, although standardization 
of a screening threshold has been recommended (23). 
For example, one cohort study showed that a value of 
140 mg/dL had lower false-positive rates and improved 
positive predictive values across various racial and 
ethnic groups. This analysis also showed that sensitivi-
ties were only marginally improved when using lower 
thresholds (ie, 130 mg/dL and 135 mg/dL) (24). Using 
a higher standardized threshold of 140 mg/dL may 
lower the rate of false-positive screening test results and 
unnecessary administration of the 3-hour OGTTs, which 
has been shown to be associated with increased mater-
nal stress and dissatisfaction regarding the process of 
screening for and diagnosing GDM (25–27). However, 
in the absence of clear evidence that supports one 
is related to glycemic control is debated (10). The results 
of the Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome 
study (HAPO), an international, multicenter study, dem-
onstrated a continuous relationship between maternal 
glucose levels on each of the three values of the 75-g, 
2-hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and cesarean 
delivery, birth weight greater than the 90th percentile, 
clinical neonatal hypoglycemia, and fetal hyperinsu-
linemia (11). Other studies have demonstrated that fetal 
exposure to maternal diabetes contributes to childhood 
and adult-onset obesity and diabetes in offspring, which 
is independent of risks associated with obesity and 
genetic predisposition (12, 13).
Screening Practices, Diagnostic 
Thresholds, and Treatment Benefits
Historically, screening for GDM consisted of obtaining 
the patient’s medical history and focused primarily on 
past obstetric outcomes and a family medical history of 
type 2 diabetes. A 1973 study proposed the use of the 
50-g, 1-hour OGTT as a screening tool for GDM (14). 
This test has since become widely accepted, and 95% of 
obstetricians in the United States use it as the tool for 
universal screening of pregnant women (15, 16). 
The use of historic factors (family or personal his-
tory of diabetes, previous adverse pregnancy outcome, 
glycosuria, and obesity) to identify GDM will fail to 
identify approximately one half of women with GDM 
(17). Although certain factors place women at low risk 
of GDM, it may not be cost effective to screen that group 
of women with glucose tolerance testing. However, such 
low-risk women represent only 10% of pregnant women 
and identifying those who should not be screened may 
add unnecessary complexity to the screening process 
(18). Therefore, in 2014, the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force made a recommendation to screen all preg-
nant women for GDM at or beyond 24 weeks of gesta-
tion (16). 
Clinical Considerations and 
Recommendations
 How is gestational diabetes mellitus 
diagnosed? 
All pregnant women should be screened for GDM with 
a laboratory-based screening test(s) using blood glucose 
levels. Screening for GDM generally is performed at 
24–28 weeks of gestation (19). Early pregnancy screen-
ing for undiagnosed type 2 diabetes, preferably at the 
initiation of prenatal care, is suggested in over- 
weight and obese women with additional diabetic risk 

VOL. 131, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2018 
Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus e51
cutoff value over another (ie, 130 mg/dL, 135 mg/dL, 
or 140 mg/dL) for the 1-hour glucose screening test, 
obstetricians and obstetric care providers may select one 
of these as a single consistent cutoff for their practice, 
using factors such as community prevalence rates of 
GDM when making their decision. 
Different cutoffs for the 3-hour OGTT also have 
been proposed. Table 1 (19, 20) lists the diagnostic 
thresholds established for the 3-hour OGTT by the 
National Diabetes Data Group and by Carpenter and 
Coustan, with the latter using lower thresholds that 
subsequently result in higher rates of GDM diagnosis 
(20). In the absence of clear comparative trials, one set 
of diagnostic criteria for the 3-hour OGTT cannot be 
clearly recommended over the other. For example, in a 
cross-sectional study that compared the two sets of crite-
ria in more than 26,000 women found that the diagnosis 
of GDM increased on average by 50% with the use of 
the Carpenter and Coustan thresholds (28). However, a 
study that examined the clinical outcomes showed that 
the women in whom GDM would have been incremen-
tally diagnosed by the Carpenter and Coustan criteria 
alone had higher rates of perinatal complications than the 
women with values below these diagnostic thresholds 
(29). Women who have even one abnormal value on the 
100-g, 3-hour OGTT have a significantly increased risk 
of adverse perinatal outcomes compared with women 
without GDM (29). Although a higher level of scrutiny 
may be focused on this subset of women, further research 
is needed to clarify the risk of adverse outcomes in 
patients with one abnormal value on the 100-g, 3-hour 
OGTT and whether they would benefit from treatment.
Given the benefits of standardization, practitioners 
and institutions should select a single set of diagnostic 
criteria, either plasma or serum glucose levels desig- 
nated by the Carpenter and Coustan criteria or the 
Box 1. Screening Strategy for 
Detecting Pregestational Diabetes or 
Early Gestational Diabetes Mellitus ^
Consider testing in all women who are overweight or 
obese (ie, have a body mass index greater than 25 or 
greater than 23 in Asian Americans) and have one 
or more of the following additional risk factors:
• Physical inactivity
• First-degree relative with diabetes
• High-risk race or ethnicity (eg, African American, 
Latino, Native American, Asian American, Pacific 
Islander)
• Have previously given birth to an infant weighing 
4,000g (approximately 9 lb) or more 
• Previous gestational diabetes mellitus
• Hypertension (140/90 mm Hg or on therapy for 
hypertension)
• High-density lipoprotein cholesterol level less than 
35 mg/dL (0.90 mmol/L), a triglyceride level greater 
than 250 mg/dL (2.82 mmol/L)
• Women with polycystic ovarian syndrome 
• A1C greater than or equal to 5.7%, impaired glucose 
tolerance, or impaired fasting glucose on previous 
testing
• Other clinical conditions associated with insulin 
resistance (eg, prepregnancy body mass index greater 
than 40 kg/m2, acanthosis nigricans)
• History of cardiovascular disease
If pregestational or gestational diabetes mellitus is not 
diagnosed, blood glucose testing should be repeated at 
24–28 weeks of gestation.
Adapted with permission from the American Diabetes Association. 
Classification and Diagnosis of Diabetes. Diabetes Care 2017;40 
(Suppl. 1):S11–S24. Copyright 2017 American Diabetes Association.
Table 1. Proposed Diagnostic Criteria for Gestational Diabetes Mellitus* ^
 
Plasma or Serum Glucose 
Plasma Level 
 
Level Carpenter and 
National Diabetes 
 
 
Coustan Conversion 
Data Group Conversion
Status 
mg/dL 
mmol/L 
mg/dL 
mmol/L
Fasting 
95 
5.3 
105 
5.8
1 hour 
180 
10.0 
190 
10.6
2 hours 
155 
8.6 
165 
9.2
3 hours 
140 
7.8 
145 
8.0
*A diagnosis generally requires that two or more thresholds be met or exceeded, although some clinicians choose to use 
just one elevated value. 
Adapted with permission from the American Diabetes Association. Classification and Diagnosis of Diabetes. Diabetes Care 
2017;40 (Suppl. 1):S11–S24. Copyright 2017 American Diabetes Association.

e52 Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY
be studied before they are proposed at a national level. 
However, individual practices and institutions may 
choose to use the IADPSG’s recommendation, if appro-
priate, for the population they serve. 
 What are the benefits of treating gestational 
diabetes mellitus? 
The 2005 Australian Carbohydrate Intolerance Study 
in Pregnant Women trial, the first large-scale (1,000 
women), randomized treatment trial for GDM (34) 
found the treatment was associated with a significant 
reduction in the rate of the primary outcome, a compos-
ite of serious newborn complications (perinatal death, 
shoulder dystocia, and birth trauma, including fracture 
or nerve palsy). Treatment also reduced preeclampsia 
(from 18% to 12%) as well as reduced the frequency of 
infants who were large for gestational age (LGA) (from 
22% to 13%) and who had a birth weight greater than 
4,000 g (from 21% to 10%). A subsequent random-
ized, multicenter treatment trial of 958 women with 
mild GDM conducted in the United States found that, 
although there were no differences in the frequency of 
the primary composite outcome (perinatal death, neo-
natal hypoglycemia, elevated umbilical cord C-peptide 
level, and birth trauma), several significant differences 
in secondary outcomes were observed with treatment, 
including a lower frequency of LGA infants, lower fre-
quency of birth weight exceeding 4,000 g, and reduced 
neonatal fat mass (35). Moreover, the rates of cesarean 
delivery, shoulder dystocia, and hypertensive disorders 
were significantly reduced in women who were treated 
for GDM. A U.S. Preventive Services Task Force sys-
tematic review underscored the demonstrated benefits 
of treating GDM and highlighted the reduced risks of 
preeclampsia, shoulder dystocia, and macrosomia (36). 
The treatment in such studies has consisted of dietary 
counseling with specific nutritional approaches (37–39) 
and exercise (40, 41). Based on this evidence, women in 
whom GDM is diagnosed should receive nutrition and 
exercise counseling, and when this fails to adequately 
control glucose levels, medication should be used for 
maternal and fetal benefit. It is important to note that 
in both trials described above, women with elevated 
glucose values were treated with insulin, not oral agents, 
when medical nutrition treatment did not control glucose 
values.
 How should blood glucose be monitored in a 
woman with gestational diabetes mellitus? 
Once a woman with GDM begins nutrition therapy 
(dietary counseling), surveillance of blood glucose lev-
els is required to confirm that glycemic control has been 
plasma levels established by the National Diabetes Data 
Group, for consistent use within their patient popula-
tions. Considerations for selection of one set of diag-
nostic criteria over the other could include, but are not 
limited to, the baseline prevalence of diabetes in their 
specific communities and the availability of resources 
to appropriately manage women in whom GDM will 
be diagnosed by any given protocol. This approach, 
although imperfect, avoids establishment of a single set 
of diagnostic criteria across all populations based on 
expert opinion alone.
A one-step approach to establishing the diagnosis 
of GDM using a 75-g, 2-hour OGTT has been used 
and promoted by other organizations. For example, in 
2010, the International Association of Diabetes and 
Pregnancy Study Group (IADPSG) recommended that 
a universal 75-g, 2-hour OGTT be performed during 
pregnancy and that the diagnosis of GDM be established 
when any single threshold value was met or exceeded 
(fasting value, 92 mg/dL; 1-hour value, 180 mg/dL; 
or 2-hour value, 153 mg/dL) (30). Overall, using the 
proposed IADPSG criteria would identify approxi-
mately 18% of pregnant women in the United States 
as having GDM; in some subpopulations, the propor-
tion of women in whom GDM is diagnosed would be 
even higher. In 2011, the ADA endorsed these criteria 
while acknowledging that adopting these cutoffs would 
significantly increase the prevalence of GDM (31). 
The additional women in whom GDM would be diag-
nosed may be at a lower risk of adverse outcomes 
than and may not derive similar benefits from diag-
nosis and treatment as women in whom GDM was 
diagnosed by traditional criteria (32). As of 2017, the 
ADA continues to recognize that there is an absence of 
clear evidence that supports the IADPSG-recommended 
approach versus the more traditional two-step screening 
approach (20).
In 2013, a Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development Consensus 
Development Conference on Diagnosing Gestational 
Diabetes recommended that obstetricians and obstetric 
care providers continue to use a two-step approach to 
screen for and diagnose GDM. The report underscored 
the lack of evidence that the use of the one-step 75-g, 
2-hour OGTT to diagnose GDM leads to clinically 
significant improvements in maternal or newborn out-
comes and highlighted the significant increase in health 
care costs that would result (23). Additionally, a 2015 
Cochrane review supported that no specific screening 
strategy has been shown to be optimal (33). In light 
of this, the American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists (ACOG) supports the two-step process 
and recommends that implications of suggested changes 

VOL. 131, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2018 
Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus e53
demonstrated a reduction in large-for-gestational-age 
neonates, macrosomia (defined as 4,000 g or more), and 
neonatal fat mass in neonates born to women random-
ized to lifestyle interventions (48). Additionally, women 
randomized to the lifestyle interventions were more 
likely to meet postpartum weight goals 1 year after preg-
nancy. Despite these promising findings, the specific 
dietary and exercise approaches are less well studied.
The goal of medical nutrition therapy in women 
with GDM is to achieve normal blood glucose levels, 
prevent ketosis, provide adequate weight gain, and 
contribute to appropriate fetal growth and develop-
ment. The ADA recommends nutritional counseling by 
a registered dietitian and development of a personal-
ized nutrition plan based on the individual’s body mass 
index for all patients with GDM (19). In some clinical 
settings in which a dietitian is not readily available, a 
clinician should be able to provide recommendations to 
the patient based on three major nutritional components: 
1) caloric allotment, 2) carbohydrate intake, and 3) 
caloric distribution.
A diet composed of 50–60% carbohydrates often 
will result in excessive weight gain and postpran-
dial hyperglycemia. Therefore, it has been suggested 
that carbohydrate intake be limited to 33–40% of 
calories, with the remaining calories divided between 
protein (20%) and fat (40%) (49); however, the actu-
al dietary composition that optimizes perinatal out-
comes is unknown. For example, a randomized trial of 
99 women with GDM that compared a low-glycemic 
index nutrition plan with a conventional high-fiber diet 
found that both produced similar pregnancy outcomes 
(39). A small, recent randomized trial demonstrated 
that women with GDM randomized to a complex car-
bohydrate diet had lower fasting glucose values as 
compared with those on a conventional diet (50). Given 
these findings and the results of other treatment trials, 
complex carbohydrates are recommended over simple 
carbohydrates because they are digested more slowly, 
are less likely to produce significant postprandial hyper-
glycemia, and potentially reduce insulin resistance (38). 
There is little evidence evaluating or supporting differ-
ent dietary approaches to the treatment of GDM (37). 
In practice, three meals and two to three snacks are 
recommended to distribute carbohydrate intake and to 
reduce postprandial glucose fluctuations.
Although there are multiple randomized trials that 
have examined exercise and lifestyle interventions in 
adults with diabetes who are not pregnant, there are 
few published exercise trials in women with GDM. 
Even though most of these published trials have small 
sample sizes, they do appear to show improvement 
in glucose levels (40, 51–54). In adults with diabetes 
established. However, there is insufficient evidence to 
define the optimal frequency of blood glucose testing 
in women with GDM. Based on the data available, the 
general recommendation is for daily glucose monitoring 
four times a day, once after fasting and again after each 
meal.
Mean fasting glucose values may be useful for 
managing diabetes in pregnant women because they are 
predictive of increased neonatal fat mass in the women’s 
offspring. Neonatal fat mass has been shown to be 
associated with the development of childhood obe-
sity and diabetes (42). Another study, a randomized 
controlled trial that compared the value of prepran-
dial versus postprandial measurements for blood glu- 
cose monitoring of women with GDM, showed that use 
of the 1-hour postprandial measurement was associated 
with better glycemic control, a lower incidence of LGA 
infants, and lower rates of cesarean delivery for cepha-
lopelvic disproportion (43). Given this evidence, fasting 
and postprandial values should be used for monitor- 
ing blood glucose in women with GDM. Assessment of 
postprandial blood glucose can be undertaken at either 
1 hour or 2 hours after meals. No study to date has 
demonstrated the superiority of either approach (44–46), 
and this may be because postprandial glucose peaks 
at approximately 90 minutes, between the two time 
points (47). 
Once the patient’s glucose levels are well controlled 
by diet, the frequency of glucose monitoring may be 
modified depending on gestational age, overall concerns 
for adherence, and likely need for future adjustments to 
care. It is unusual to recommend obtaining fewer than 
two measurements per day.
In addition, no controlled trials have been per-
formed to identify optimal glycemic targets. The ADA 
and ACOG recommend that fasting or preprandial 
blood glucose values be below 95 mg/dL and post-
prandial blood glucose values be below 140 mg/dL at 
1 hour or 120 mg/dL at 2 hours to reduce the risk of 
macrosomia (19). Generally, these values are reviewed 
weekly; however, when there are many abnormal val-
ues, more frequent review is common. Alternatively, 
with stable, normal values, less frequent review is 
acceptable.
 What nonpharmacologic treatments are 
effective in managing gestational diabetes 
mellitus? 
Most commonly, GDM management begins with the 
nonpharmacologic approaches of dietary modifications, 
exercise, and glucose monitoring. A recent meta-analysis 
of lifestyle modification trials in women with GDM 

e54 Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY
intermediate-acting insulin, NPH insulin has been the 
mainstay, but more recently insulin glargine and insulin 
detemir have been described for long-acting use (57–
59). For short-acting insulin, insulin analogues—includ-
ing insulin lispro and insulin aspart—have been used 
in pregnancy, and these insulin analogues do not cross 
the placenta. Insulin lispro and insulin aspart should be 
used preferentially over regular insulin because both 
have a more rapid onset of action, enabling the patient 
to administer her insulin right at the time of a meal 
rather than 10–15 minutes before an anticipated meal. 
This provides better glycemic control and helps avoid 
hypoglycemic episodes from errors in timing (60, 61) 
(Table 2).
Oral Antidiabetic Medications
Oral antidiabetic medications (eg, metformin and gly-
buride) increasingly are being used among women with 
GDM, despite the fact that they have not been approved 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for this indi-
cation (62) and even though insulin continues to be the 
ADA-recommended first-line therapy (19). 
Metformin is a biguanide that inhibits hepatic 
gluconeogenesis and glucose absorption and stimu-
lates glucose uptake in peripheral tissues. Historically, 
metformin primarily has been used in women with pre-
gestational diabetes or those with polycystic ovary syn-
drome and infertility. In women with polycystic ovary 
syndrome, metformin is often continued until the end 
of the first trimester, despite only limited evidence to 
suggest that such use decreases the risks of adverse 
pregnancy outcomes, including first-trimester loss (63). 
Metformin crosses the placenta with levels that can 
be as high as maternal concentrations. The long-term 
metabolic influence on the offspring is unknown (64); 
however, one recent study found similar developmental 
outcomes by 2 years of age (65). This concern about the 
who are not pregnant, exercise—particularly weight 
training—increases lean muscle mass and improves tis-
sue sensitivity to insulin. In overweight or obese women 
with GDM, exercise also may be able to improve glyce-
mic control. Therefore, a moderate exercise program is 
recommended as part of the treatment plan for women 
with GDM (19). Such a plan should mirror diabetes 
care in general, and women with GDM should aim for 
30 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise at 
least 5 days a week or a minimum of 150 minutes 
per week (31). Simple exercise such as walking for 
10–15 minutes after each meal can lead to improved 
glycemic control and is commonly recommended (55).
 What pharmacologic treatments are effective 
in managing gestational diabetes mellitus? 
Pharmacologic treatment is recommended when target 
glucose levels cannot be consistently achieved through 
nutrition therapy and exercise. However, a system-
atic review found no conclusive evidence for a spe-
cific threshold value at which medical therapy should 
be started (56). Insulin historically has been considered 
the standard therapy for GDM management in cases 
refractory to nutrition therapy and exercise and this has 
continued to be reinforced by the ADA (19). 
Insulin, which does not cross the placenta, can 
achieve tight metabolic control and traditionally has 
been added to nutrition therapy if fasting blood glucose 
levels consistently are greater than or equal to 95 mg/dL, 
if 1-hour levels consistently are greater than or equal to 
140 mg/dL, or if 2-hour levels consistently are greater 
than or equal to 120 mg/dL. These thresholds largely have 
been extrapolated from recommendations for managing 
pregnancy in women with preexisting diabetes. If insulin 
is used throughout the day in women in whom fasting 
and postprandial hyperglycemia are present after most 
meals, a typical starting total dosage is 0.7–1.0 units/kg 
daily. This dosage should be divided with a regimen of 
multiple injections using long-acting or intermediate-
acting insulin in combination with short-acting insulin. 
However, if there are only isolated abnormal values 
at a specific time of day, focusing the insulin regimen 
to correct the specific hyperglycemia is preferred. For 
example, in women with only elevated fasting values, 
nighttime administration of intermediate-acting insulin, 
such as NPH insulin, may be adequate. Similarly, in 
women with elevated values only for breakfast postpran-
dial, short-acting insulin before breakfast may be the 
only insulin needed. Regardless of the starting dosage, 
subsequent dosage adjustments should be individual-
ized according to the woman’s monitored blood glucose 
levels at particular times of the day. For long-acting and 
Table 2. Action Profile of Commonly Used Insulin Agents ^
 
Onset of 
Peak of 
Duration of 
Type 
Action 
Action (h) 
Action (h)
Insulin lispro 
1–15 min 
1–2 
4–5 
Insulin aspart 
1–15 min 
1–2 
4–5 
Regular insulin 
30–60 min 
2–4 
6–8 
Isophane insulin 
1–3 h 
5–7 
13–18 
suspension 
(NPH insulin)
Insulin glargine 
1–2 h 
No peak 
24 
Insulin detemir 
1–3 h 
Minimal peak 
18–26 
 
 
at 8–10
Modified from Gabbe SG, Graves CR. Management of diabetes mellitus compli-
cating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2003;102:857–68.

VOL. 131, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2018 
Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus e55
twice daily. Because metformin generally is not used in 
patients with chronic renal disease, creatinine often is 
checked at baseline to ensure adequate renal function. 
The most common adverse effects of metformin are 
abdominal pain and diarrhea, which are minimized by 
slowly increasing the dosage. Such adverse effects were 
reported in 2.5–45.7% of patients enrolled in studies 
of metformin in pregnancy (68), and it is common to 
recommend taking the medication with meals to reduce 
symptoms. If higher doses are needed, the maximum 
dose is usually 2,500–3,000 mg per day in two to three 
divided doses. In women who decline insulin therapy or 
who the obstetricians or obstetric care providers believe 
will be unable to safely administer insulin, or for women 
who cannot afford insulin, metformin is a reasonable 
alternative choice.
Glyburide is a sulfonylurea that binds to pancre-
atic beta-cell adenosine triphosphate potassium chan-
nel receptors to increase insulin secretion and insulin 
sensitivity of peripheral tissues. It should not be used 
in patients who report a sulfa allergy. Previous meta-
analyses have noted increased risks of macrosomia and 
hypoglycemia with glyburide compared with insulin in 
the treatment of GDM (66, 67); whereas a more recent 
meta-analysis only demonstrated higher rates of neonatal 
hypoglycemia (72). These worse outcomes are despite 
the fact that individual trials comparing glyburide 
with insulin failed to show any significant difference 
in degree of glycemic control (73–75). Observational 
studies have reported higher rates of preeclampsia, 
hyperbilirubinemia, and stillbirth with use of glyburide 
as compared with insulin, but many other outcomes have 
not been statistically significantly different (62, 76–81). 
The common dosage of glyburide is 2.5–20 mg daily in 
divided doses, although pharmacokinetic studies during 
pregnancy indicate daily doses up to 30 mg may be nec-
essary to achieve adequate control (82). Additionally, 
4–16% (or more) women required the addition of insulin 
to maintain good glycemic control when glyburide was 
used as initial treatment (73, 77, 83, 84). Despite the 
increased use of glyburide over the past decade (62), the 
evidence indicates that glyburide treatment should not be 
recommended as a first-choice pharmacologic treatment 
because, in most studies, it does not yield equivalent 
outcomes to insulin or metformin.
Concerns also have been raised about the safety of 
oral antidiabetic agents during pregnancy. For exam-
ple, although an initial study that analyzed umbilical 
cord blood revealed no detectable glyburide in exposed 
pregnancies (73), a subsequent study demonstrated that 
glyburide does cross the placenta (82). As mentioned 
previously, metformin also has been found to freely cross 
the placenta, and the fetus is exposed to concentrations 
fetal exposure to metformin and the absence of long-
term neonatal follow-up after in-utero metformin expo-
sure is one reason the ADA continues to recommend that 
when pharmacologic treatment of GDM is indicated, 
insulin is considered the preferred treatment for diabetes 
in pregnancy (19).
In one large trial, 751 women with GDM were ran-
domly assigned to receive insulin therapy or metformin 
(plus insulin if needed). Both groups experienced similar 
rates of a composite outcome of perinatal morbidity, 
consisting of neonatal hypoglycemia, respiratory dis-
tress, need for phototherapy, birth trauma, prematurity, 
and low Apgar scores (66). In another prospective trial, 
women randomized to metformin had lower mean glu-
cose levels, less gestational weight gain, and neonates 
with lower rates of hypoglycemia than those randomized 
to insulin (67). 
Meta-analyses comparing metformin to insulin have 
been conflicting dependent upon whether unpublished 
studies or women with type II diabetes mellitus are 
included. In an initial meta-analysis that included only 
published data, the differences between neonates deliv-
ered to women randomized to metformin versus insulin 
were minimal (68, 69). Yet, women randomized to met-
formin experienced a higher rate of preterm birth (risk 
ratio [RR], 1.5), but a lower rate of gestational hyperten-
sion (RR, 0.53) (68). 
In a recent meta-analysis that included unpublished 
trials, a network meta-analysis was performed (70). This 
method combines information across multiple treatments 
simultaneously with the analysis of direct evidence 
(which comes from studies directly randomizing treat-
ments of interest) and indirect evidence (which comes 
from studies comparing treatments of interest with a 
common comparator). The effect size did not demon-
strate superiority when metformin was compared with 
insulin on the outcomes of large for gestational age, 
macrosomia, neonatal hypoglycemia, or cesarean deliv-
ery. Interestingly, in the dichotomous meta-analysis 
performed, no difference in preterm delivery was dem-
onstrated (RR 1.37, 95%; CI 0.62–3.01). A subsequent 
meta-analysis with trials that included women with type 
II diabetes and GDM also noted no increase in preterm 
delivery (71). Thus, although metformin may be a rea-
sonable alternative approach to treat gestational diabetes, 
it is important to counsel women about the lack of supe-
riority when compared with insulin, the placental transfer 
of the drug, and the absence of long-term data in exposed 
offspring. Additionally, in the aforementioned prospec-
tive trials, between 26% and 46% of women who took 
metformin alone eventually required insulin (66, 67). 
The dosage for metformin usually starts at 500 mg 
nightly for 1 week at initiation, then increases to 500 mg 

e56 Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY
GDM with poor glycemic control. Additionally, because 
those women who are treated medically with insulin or 
oral agents had suboptimal glycemic control at some 
time, fetal surveillance usually is recommended for 
these patients as well (87). Antenatal fetal testing in 
women with poorly controlled or medication-requiring 
GDM without other morbidities usually is initiated at 
32 weeks of gestation. If other factors associated with 
increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcome are pres-
ent, it may be reasonable to start surveillance earlier in 
pregnancy. 
Studies have not specifically demonstrated an 
increase in stillbirth with well-controlled A1GDM before 
40 weeks of gestation. Thus, antepartum fetal testing may 
not be necessary in these women. There is no consensus 
regarding antepartum fetal testing among women with 
well-controlled GDM who are not medically treated 
(A1GDM). If antepartum testing is to be used in such 
patients, it is generally started later than in women with 
A2GDM. The specific antepartum test and frequency 
of testing may be chosen according to local practice; 
however, because polyhydramnios can result from fetal 
hyperglycemia, it is common for clinicians to use testing 
that incorporates serial measures of amniotic fluid.
 What are delivery considerations in 
pregnancies complicated by gestational 
diabetes mellitus? 
Women with GDM with good glycemic control and no 
other complications are commonly managed expectantly 
until term (88, 89). In most cases, women with good 
glycemic control who are receiving medical therapy 
do not require delivery before 39 weeks of gestation. 
The recent GINEXMAL trial of GDM-only patients 
randomized women to induction of labor at 38 weeks 
of gestation versus expectant management up to 
41 weeks of gestation (90). Although the study did not 
achieve its intended sample size, there was no difference 
in cesarean delivery rates (12.6% versus 11.8%, P=.81) 
or many other outcomes. There was, however, a higher 
rate of hyperbilirubinemia in the induced group (10.0% 
versus 4.1%, P=.03). In a randomized trial in which 
women with insulin-treated GDM and fetuses believed 
to be of appropriate weight for gestational age were ran-
domized at 38 weeks of gestation to induction of labor 
within 1 week or expectant management, there was no 
difference in cesarean delivery rates (91). However, 
there was a smaller proportion of LGA infants in the 
induction group. Furthermore, a multiple time series 
cohort study showed that there were no significant 
differences in either macrosomia or cesarean delivery 
rates among women with insulin-treated GDM who 
similar to maternal levels (85). Theoretic concerns include 
the potential effects of in utero metformin exposure on 
long-term glucose homeostasis of developing offspring. 
It also is not yet known whether oral antidiabetic medi-
cations affect the progression to type 2 diabetes later 
in life in women who were treated during pregnancy. 
A recent Cochrane meta-analysis, reporting data on 
7,381 women, that compared insulin versus any type of 
oral antidiabetic pharmacological therapies noted similar 
effects on health outcomes. This investigation combined 
women taking either metformin, glyburide, or both, and 
acarbose (86). Individually these oral antidiabetic medica-
tions have been noted to have different clinical efficacies 
on maternal and neonatal outcomes with diverse safety 
profiles, hence pooling these trials may have a confound-
ing effect limiting the conclusions drawn from this meta-
analysis. Although current data demonstrate no adverse 
short-term effects on maternal or neonatal health from 
oral antidiabetic therapy during pregnancy, long-term 
outcomes are not yet available. Thus, health care provid-
ers should counsel women of the limitations in safety data 
when prescribing oral agents to women with GDM.
Taking into account that oral antidiabetic medi-
cations are not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration for the treatment of GDM, cross the 
placenta, and lack long-term neonatal safety data; and 
considering that summaries of the current medical lit-
erature note poor trial quality while not being designed 
to assess equivalence or noninferiority when comparing 
oral agents to insulin; insulin is considered the preferred 
treatment when pharmacologic treatment of GDM is 
indicated. Although this recommendation aligns with 
the ADA recommendation, ACOG recognizes that clini-
cal situations may occur that necessitate the use of oral 
agents. As aforementioned, in women who decline insu-
lin or who the obstetricians or obstetric care providers 
believe will be unable to safely administer insulin, or 
for women who cannot afford insulin, metformin (and 
rarely glyburide) is a reasonable alternative choice in the 
context of discussing with the patient the limitations of 
the safety data and a high rate of treatment failure that 
requires insulin supplementation.
 Is fetal assessment indicated in pregnancies 
complicated by gestational diabetes mellitus? 
Antepartum fetal testing is recommended for patients 
with pregestational diabetes. Because the increased risk 
of fetal demise in patients with pregestational diabetes 
is related to suboptimal glycemic control, it would be 
expected that women with GDM who have poor glyce-
mic control also would be at increased risk. Therefore, 
fetal surveillance may be beneficial for women with 

VOL. 131, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2018 
Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus e57
LGA at birth (100). Additionally, in women whose 
fetuses received an LGA diagnosis, the risk of cesar-
ean delivery was increased independent of actual birth 
weight. It has been estimated that up to 588 cesarean 
deliveries would be needed to prevent a single case of 
permanent brachial plexus palsy for an estimated fetal 
weight of 4,500 g, and up to 962 cesarean deliveries 
would be needed for an estimated fetal weight of 4,000 g 
(101, 102). Based on the available data, it is not possible 
to determine whether the potential benefits of planned 
cesarean delivery at a given estimated fetal weight are 
similar for women with GDM and women with pre-
existing diabetes. Therefore, it appears reasonable to 
recommend that women with GDM should be counseled 
regarding the risks and benefits of a scheduled cesarean 
delivery when the estimated fetal weight is 4,500 g or 
more (103).
 How should women with a history of gesta-
tional diabetes mellitus be screened and 
counseled postpartum? 
Although the carbohydrate intolerance of GDM fre-
quently resolves after delivery, up to one third of 
affected women will have diabetes or impaired glucose 
metabolism at postpartum screening. It has been esti-
mated that between 15% and 70% will develop diabe-
tes (predominantly type 2) later in life (8, 104–107). 
Another study showed that women with a history of 
GDM have a sevenfold increased risk of developing 
type 2 diabetes compared with women without a history 
of GDM (108). Therefore, screening at 4–12 weeks post-
partum is recommended for all women who had GDM to 
identify women with diabetes, impaired fasting glucose 
levels, or impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) (Fig. 1) 
(19). A fasting plasma glucose test and the 75-g, 2-hour 
OGTT have been used for diagnosing overt diabetes 
in the postpartum period. Although the fasting plasma 
glucose test is easier to perform, it lacks sensitivity for 
detecting other forms of abnormal glucose metabolism. 
Results of the OGTT can confirm an impaired fasting 
glucose level and impaired glucose tolerance. Therefore, 
the Fifth International Workshop on Gestational Diabetes 
Mellitus recommends that women with GDM undergo a 
75-g, 2-hour OGTT in the postpartum period (109). This 
usually should include a fasting plasma glucose as well. 
All women who had GDM should follow up with 
a primary care physician. Additionally, women with 
impaired fasting glucose, IGT, or diabetes should be 
referred for preventive or medical therapy. Women with 
impaired fasting glucose or IGT may respond to life-
style modification and pharmacologic interventions to 
decrease incident diabetes. Women with frank diabetes 
underwent induction of labor at 38–39 weeks of gestation 
when compared with expectantly managed historic con- 
trols (92). Shoulder dystocia was experienced by 10% 
of the expectant management group after more than 
40 weeks of gestation versus 1.4% in the group with 
labor induction at 38–39 weeks of gestation. A systemat-
ic review later confirmed these findings (93). However, 
a recent study that compared induction of labor before 
40 weeks of gestation with expectant management dem-
onstrated a reduction in cesarean delivery among women 
with GDM who were induced (94). A decision analysis 
demonstrated that delivery of women with GDM at 
38 weeks or 39 weeks of gestation would reduce overall 
perinatal mortality without increasing cesarean delivery 
rates (95). Although persuasive, these data have not 
been confirmed by large randomized trials. Therefore, 
the timing of delivery in women with GDM that is 
controlled with only diet and exercise (A1GDM) should 
not be before 39 weeks of gestation, unless otherwise 
indicated. In such women, expectant management up to  
40 6/7 weeks of gestation in the setting of indicated 
antepartum testing is generally appropriate. For women 
with GDM that is well controlled by medications 
(A2GDM), delivery is recommended from 39 0/7 weeks 
to 39 6/7 weeks of gestation.
In contrast, expert opinion has supported earlier 
delivery for women with poorly controlled GDM (88, 
89). But clear guidance about the degree of glycemic 
control that necessitates earlier delivery is lacking, and 
the recommendations about timing of delivery lack spe-
cific guidance as well (96). In light of this, consideration 
of timing should incorporate tradeoffs between the risks 
of prematurity and the ongoing risks of stillbirth. In such 
a setting, delivery between 37 0/7 weeks and 38 6/7 
weeks of gestation may be justified, but delivery in the 
late preterm period from 34 0/7 weeks to 36 6/7 weeks of 
gestation should be reserved for those women who fail 
in-hospital attempts to improve glycemic control or who 
have abnormal antepartum fetal testing. 
Because macrosomia is distinctly more common 
in women with GDM and because shoulder dystocia 
is more likely at any given fetal weight in pregnancies 
complicated by diabetes than in pregnancies not compli-
cated by diabetes (97–99), it is reasonable for clinicians 
to assess fetal growth by ultrasonography or by clinical 
examination late in the third trimester to attempt to iden-
tify macrosomia among women with GDM. However, 
data are insufficient to determine whether cesarean 
delivery should be performed to reduce the risk of birth 
trauma in cases of suspected macrosomia. Although 
the use of ultrasonography to estimate fetal weight is 
common, one recent study found that among cases of 
ultrasonography-diagnosed LGA infants, only 22% were 

e58 Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY
The following recommendations and conclusions 
are based on limited or inconsistent scientific 
evidence (Level B):
 All pregnant women should be screened for GDM 
with a laboratory-based screening test(s) using 
blood glucose levels. 
 In women who decline insulin therapy or who the 
obstetricians or other obstetric care providers 
believe will be unable to safely administer insulin, 
or for women who cannot afford insulin, metformin 
is a reasonable alternative choice. 
 Glyburide treatment should not be recommended as 
a first-choice pharmacologic treatment because, in 
most studies, it does not yield equivalent outcomes 
to insulin. 
 Health care providers should counsel women of the 
limitations in safety data when prescribing oral 
agents to women with GDM.
 Women with GDM should be counseled regarding 
the risks and benefits of a scheduled cesarean deliv-
ery when the estimated fetal weight is 4,500 g or 
more. 
The following recommendations and conclusions 
are based primarily on consensus and expert 
opinion (Level C):
benefit from ongoing intensive medical therapy. The 
ADA and ACOG recommend repeat testing every 
1–3 years for women who had a pregnancy affected by 
GDM and normal postpartum screening test results (19).
For women who may have subsequent pregnan-
cies, screening more frequently between pregnancies 
can detect abnormal glucose metabolism before fer-
tilization and provides an opportunity to ensure pre-
pregnancy glucose control (109). Women should be 
encouraged to discuss their GDM history and need 
for screening with their obstetricians or obstetric care 
providers.
Summary of 
Recommendations and 
Conclusions
The following recommendations and conclusions 
are based on good and consistent scientific 
evidence (Level A):
 Women in whom GDM is diagnosed should receive 
nutrition and exercise counseling, and when this 
fails to adequately control glucose levels, medica-
tion should be used for maternal and fetal benefit.
 When pharmacologic treatment of GDM is indicat-
ed, insulin is considered the preferred treatment for 
diabetes in pregnancy. 
Figure 1. Management of postpartum screening results. Abbreviations: FPG, fasting plasma glucose; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance 
test; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance. ^
Gestational diabetes
FPG or 75-g, 2-hr OGTT at 4–12 weeks postpartum
FPG >125 mg/dL or
2-hr glucose >199 mg/dL
FPG <100 mg/dL or
2-hr glucose <140 mg/dL
FPG 100–125 mg/dL or
2-hr glucose 140–199 mg/dL
Impaired fasting glucose or IGT or both
Diabetes mellitus
Normal
Consider referral for management
Weight loss and physical activity 
counseling as needed
Consider metformin if combined 
impaired fasting glucose and IGT
Medical nutrition therapy
Yearly assessment of glycemic status
Assess glycemic status every 1–3 years
Weight loss and physical activity 
counseling as needed
Refer for diabetes management

VOL. 131, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2018 
Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus e59
For More Information
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecol-
ogists has identified additional resources on topics 
related to this document that may be helpful for ob-
gyns, other health care providers, and patients. You 
may view these resources at www.acog.org/More-Info/
GestationalDiabetes.
These resources are for information only and are not 
meant to be comprehensive. Referral to these resources 
does not imply the American College of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists’ endorsement of the organization, the 
organization’s website, or the content of the resource. 
These resources may change without notice.
References
 
1. Correa A, Bardenheier B, Elixhauser A, Geiss LS, Gregg 
E. Trends in prevalence of diabetes among delivery hos-
pitalizations, United States, 1993-2009. Matern Child 
Health J 2015;19:635-42. (Level II-3) ^
 
2. Caughey AB, Cheng YW, Stotland NE, Washington AE, 
Escobar GJ. Maternal and paternal race/ethnicity are 
both associated with gestational diabetes. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2010;202:616.e1–5. (Level II-3) ^
 
3. Bouthoorn SH, Silva LM, Murray SE, Steegers EA, 
Jaddoe VW, Moll H, et al. Low-educated women have 
an increased risk of gestational diabetes mellitus: the 
Generation R Study. Acta Diabetol 2015;52:445–52. 
(Level II-3) ^
 
4. Yogev Y, Xenakis EM, Langer O. The association 
between preeclampsia and the severity of gestational 
diabetes: the impact of glycemic control. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2004;191:1655–60. (Level II-3) ^
 
5. Ehrenberg HM, Durnwald CP, Catalano P, Mercer 
BM. The influence of obesity and diabetes on the risk 
of cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004;191: 
969–74. (Level II-3) ^
 
6. England LJ, Dietz PM, Njoroge T, Callaghan WM, 
Bruce C, Buus RM, et al. Preventing type 2 diabetes: 
public health implications for women with a history 
of gestational diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2009;200:365.e1–8. (Level III) ^
 
7. O’Sullivan JB. Body weight and subsequent diabetes 
mellitus. JAMA 1982;248:949–52. (Level II-3) ^
 
8. Kim C, Newton KM, Knopp RH. Gestational diabetes 
and the incidence of type 2 diabetes: a systematic review. 
Diabetes Care 2002;25:1862–8. (Systematic Review) ^
 
9. Kjos SL, Peters RK, Xiang A, Henry OA, Montoro 
M, Buchanan TA. Predicting future diabetes in Latino 
women with gestational diabetes. Utility of early post-
partum glucose tolerance testing. Diabetes 1995;44: 
586–91. (Level II-3) ^
 10. Rosenstein MG, Cheng YW, Snowden JM, Nicholson 
JM, Doss AE, Caughey AB. The risk of stillbirth and 
infant death stratified by gestational age in women with 
 In the absence of clear evidence that supports one 
cutoff value over another (ie, 130 mg/dL, 135 mg/
dL, or 140 mg/dL) for the 1-hour glucose screening 
test, obstetricians and obstetric care providers may 
select one of these as a single consistent cutoff for 
their practice, using factors such as community prev-
alence rates of GDM when making their decision.
 In the absence of clear comparative trials, one set of 
diagnostic criteria for the 3-hour OGTT cannot be 
clearly recommended over the other. Given the ben-
efits of standardization, practitioners and institutions 
should select a single set of diagnostic criteria, 
either plasma or serum glucose levels designated by 
the Carpenter and Coustan criteria or the plasma 
levels established by the National Diabetes Data 
Group, for consistent use within their patient popu-
lations. 
 Once a woman with GDM begins nutrition therapy 
(dietary counseling), surveillance of blood glucose 
levels is required to confirm that glycemic control 
has been established. 
 In practice, three meals and two to three snacks are 
recommended to distribute carbohydrate intake and 
to reduce postprandial glucose fluctuations.
 Women with GDM should aim for 30 minutes of 
moderate-intensity aerobic exercise at least 5 days a 
week or a minimum of 150 minutes per week.
 The timing of delivery in women with GDM that is 
controlled with only diet and exercise (A1GDM) 
should not be before 39 weeks of gestation, unless 
otherwise indicated. In such women, expectant 
management up to 40 6/7 weeks of gestation in the 
setting of indicated antepartum testing is general-
ly appropriate. 
 For women with GDM that is well controlled by 
medications (A2GDM), delivery is recommended at 
39 0/7 to 39 6/7 weeks of gestation.
 Screening at 4–12 weeks postpartum is recommend-
ed for all women who had GDM to identify women 
with diabetes, impaired fasting glucose levels, or 
impaired glucose tolerance. Women with impaired 
fasting glucose, IGT, or diabetes should be referred 
for preventive or medical therapy. The ADA and 
ACOG recommend repeat testing every 1–3 years 
for women who had a pregnancy affected by GDM 
and normal postpartum screening test results.
 Women with GDM should be counseled regarding 
the risks and benefits of a scheduled cesarean deliv-
ery when the estimated fetal weight is 4,500 g or 
more.

e60 Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY
 24. Esakoff TF, Cheng YW, Caughey AB. Screening for 
gestational diabetes: different cut-offs for different 
ethnicities? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;193:1040–4. 
(Level II-3) ^
 25. Rumbold AR, Crowther CA. Women’s experiences of 
being screened for gestational diabetes mellitus. Aust N 
Z J Obstet Gynaecol 2002;42:131–7. (Level II-3) ^
 26. Lydon K, Dunne FP, Owens L, Avalos G, Sarma KM, 
O’Connor C, et al. Psychological stress associated 
with diabetes during pregnancy: a pilot study. Ir Med J 
2012;105:26–8. (Level II-3) ^
 27. Dalfra MG, Nicolucci A, Bisson T, Bonsembiante B, 
Lapolla A. Quality of life in pregnancy and post-partum: 
a study in diabetic patients. QLISG (Quality of Life 
Italian Study Group). Qual Life Res 2012;21:291–8. 
(Level II-3) ^
 28. Ferrara A, Hedderson MM, Quesenberry CP, Selby JV. 
Prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus detected 
by the national diabetes data group or the Carpenter 
and Coustan plasma glucose thresholds. Diabetes Care 
2002;25:1625–30. (Level II-3) ^
 29. Cheng YW, Block-Kurbisch I, Caughey AB. Carpenter-
Coustan criteria compared with the national diabetes 
data group thresholds for gestational diabetes mellitus. 
Obstet Gynecol 2009;114:326–32. (Level II-3) ^
 30. Metzger BE, Gabbe SG, Persson B, Buchanan TA, 
Catalano PA, Damm P, et al. International Association 
of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups recommenda-
tions on the diagnosis and classification of hyperglyce-
mia in pregnancy. International Association of Diabetes 
and Pregnancy Study Groups Consensus Panel. Diabetes 
Care 2010;33:676–82. (Level III) ^
 31. Standards of medical care in diabetes—2011. American 
Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2011;34(suppl 1): 
S11–61. (Level III) ^
 32. Horvath K, Koch K, Jeitler K, Matyas E, Bender R, 
Bastian H, et al. Effects of treatment in women with 
gestational diabetes mellitus: systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMJ 2010;340:c1395. (Meta-analysis) ^
 33. Farrar D, Duley L, Medley N, Lawlor DA. Different 
strategies for diagnosing gestational diabetes to improve 
maternal and infant health. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews 2015, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD007122. 
(Meta-analysis) ^
 34. Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Moss JR, McPhee AJ, Jeffries 
WS, Robinson JS. Effect of treatment of gestational 
diabetes mellitus on pregnancy outcomes.  Australian 
Carbohydrate Intolerance Study in Pregnant Women 
(ACHOIS) Trial Group. N Engl J Med 2005;352: 
2477–86. (Level I) ^
 35. Landon MB, Spong CY, Thom E, Carpenter MW, 
Ramin SM, Casey B, et al. A multicenter, randomized 
trial of treatment for mild gestational diabetes.  Eunice 
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units 
Network. N Engl J Med 2009;361:1339–48. (Level I) ^
 36. Hartling L, Dryden DM, Guthrie A, Muise M, 
Vandermeer B, Donovan L. Benefits and harms of treat-
ing gestational diabetes mellitus: a systematic review 
gestational diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2012;206:309.
e1–7. (Level II-3) ^
 11. Metzger BE, Lowe LP, Dyer AR, Trimble ER, 
Chaovarindr U, Coustan DR, et al. Hyperglycemia and 
adverse pregnancy outcomes. HAPO Study Cooperative 
Research Group. N Engl J Med 2008;358:1991–2002. 
(Level II-3) ^
 12. Dabelea D, Hanson RL, Lindsay RS, Pettitt DJ, 
Imperatore G, Gabir MM, et al. Intrauterine exposure to 
diabetes conveys risks for type 2 diabetes and obesity: a 
study of discordant sibships. Diabetes 2000;49:2208–11. 
(Level II-2) ^
 13. Clausen TD, Mathiesen ER, Hansen T, Pedersen O, 
Jensen DM, Lauenborg J, et al. Overweight and the 
metabolic syndrome in adult offspring of women 
with diet-treated gestational diabetes mellitus or type 1 
diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:2464–70. 
(Level II-3) ^
 14. O’Sullivan JB, Mahan CM, Charles D, Dandrow RV. 
Screening criteria for high-risk gestational diabetic 
patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1973;116:895–900. 
(Level II-3) ^
 15. Gabbe SG, Gregory RP, Power ML, Williams SB, 
Schulkin J. Management of diabetes mellitus by obstetri-
cian-gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 2004;103:1229–34. 
(Level III) ^
 16. Moyer VA. Screening for gestational diabetes mellitus: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation 
statement. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann 
Intern Med 2014;160:414–20. (Level III) ^
 17. Coustan DR, Nelson C, Carpenter MW, Carr SR, 
Rotondo L, Widness JA. Maternal age and screening for 
gestational diabetes: a population-based study. Obstet 
Gynecol 1989;73:557–61. (Level II-3) ^
 18. Danilenko-Dixon DR, Van Winter JT, Nelson RL, 
Ogburn PL Jr. Universal versus selective gestational dia-
betes screening: application of 1997 American Diabetes 
Association recommendations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1999;181:798–802. (Level II-3) ^
 19. Management of diabetes in pregnancy. American 
Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2017;40:S114–9. 
(Level III) ^
 20. Classification and diagnosis of diabetes. American 
Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care 2017;40:S11–24. 
(Level III) ^
 21. Chamberlain JJ, Rhinehart AS, Shaefer CF Jr, 
Neuman A. Diagnosis and management of diabetes: 
synopsis of the 2016 American Diabetes Association 
Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes. Ann Intern Med 
2016;164:542–52. (Level III) ^
 22. Amylidi S, Mosimann B, Stettler C, Fiedler GM, Surbek 
D, Raio L. First-trimester glycosylated hemoglobin in 
women at high risk for gestational diabetes. Acta Obstet 
Gynecol Scand 2016;95:93–7. (Level II-3) ^
 23. Vandorsten JP, Dodson WC, Espeland MA, Grobman 
WA, Guise JM, Mercer BM, et al. NIH consensus devel-
opment conference: diagnosing gestational diabetes 
mellitus. NIH Consens State Sci Statements 2013;29: 
1–31. (Level III) ^

VOL. 131, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2018 
Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus e61
and meta-analysis for the U.S. Preventive Services 
Task Force and the National Institutes of Health Office 
of Medical Applications of Research. Ann Intern Med 
2013;159:123–9. (Meta-analysis) ^
 37. Han S, Middleton P, Shepherd E, Van Ryswyk E, 
Crowther CA. Different types of dietary advice for 
women with gestational diabetes mellitus. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 2. Art. No.: 
CD009275. (Meta-analysis) ^
 38. Moses RG, Barker M, Winter M, Petocz P, Brand-Miller 
JC. Can a low-glycemic index diet reduce the need for 
insulin in gestational diabetes mellitus? A randomized 
trial. Diabetes Care 2009;32:996–1000. (Level I) ^
 39. Louie JC, Markovic TP, Perera N, Foote D, Petocz P, 
Ross GP, et al. A randomized controlled trial investigat-
ing the effects of a low-glycemic index diet on pregnancy 
outcomes in gestational diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 
2011;34:2341–6. (Level I) ^
 40. Ceysens G, Rouiller D, Boulvain M. Exercise for 
diabetic pregnant women. Cochrane Database of Sys- 
tematic Reviews 2006, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD004225. 
(Meta-analysis) ^
 41. Barakat R, Pelaez M, Lopez C, Lucia A, Ruiz JR. 
Exercise during pregnancy and gestational diabetes-
related adverse effects: a randomised controlled trial. Br 
J Sports Med 2013;47:630–6. (Level I) ^
 42. Durnwald CP, Mele L, Spong CY, Ramin SM, Varner 
MW, Rouse DJ, et al. Glycemic characteristics and neo-
natal outcomes of women treated for mild gestational 
diabetes.  Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) 
Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network (MFMU). 
Obstet Gynecol 2011;117:819–27. (Level II-2) ^
 43. de Veciana M, Major CA, Morgan MA, Asrat T, Toohey 
JS, Lien JM, et al. Postprandial versus preprandial blood 
glucose monitoring in women with gestational diabe-
tes mellitus requiring insulin therapy. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:1237–41. (Level I) ^
 44. Weisz B, Shrim A, Homko CJ, Schiff E, Epstein GS, 
Sivan E. One hour versus two hours postprandial glu-
cose measurement in gestational diabetes: a prospective 
study. J Perinatol 2005;25:241–4. (Level II-3) ^
 45. Moses RG, Lucas EM, Knights S. Gestational diabetes 
mellitus. At what time should the postprandial glu-
cose level be monitored? Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 
1999;39:457–60. (Level II-3) ^
 46. Sivan E, Weisz B, Homko CJ, Reece EA, Schiff E. One 
or two hours postprandial glucose measurements: are 
they the same? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001;185:604–7. 
(Level II-3) ^
 47. Ben-Haroush A, Yogev Y, Chen R, Rosenn B, Hod 
M, Langer O. The postprandial glucose profile in the 
diabetic pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004;191: 
576–81. (Level II-3) ^
 48. Brown J, Alwan NA, West J, Brown S, McKinlay CJ, 
Farrar D, et al. Lifestyle interventions for the treat-
ment of women with gestational diabetes. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews 2017, Issue 5. Art. No.: 
CD011970. (Systematic Review) ^
 49. Mulford MI, Jovanovic-Peterson L, Peterson CM. 
Alternative therapies for the management of gestational 
diabetes. Clin Perinatol 1993;20:619–34. (Level III) ^
 50. Hernandez TL, Van Pelt RE, Anderson MA, Reece MS, 
Reynolds RM, de la Houssaye BA, et al. Women with 
gestational diabetes mellitus randomized to a higher-
complex carbohydrate/low-fat diet manifest lower adi-
pose tissue insulin resistance, inflammation, glucose, and 
free fatty acids: a pilot study. Diabetes Care 2016;39:39–
42. (Level I) ^
 51. Jovanovic-Peterson L, Durak EP, Peterson CM. 
Randomized trial of diet versus diet plus cardiovascular 
conditioning on glucose levels in gestational diabetes. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:415–9. (Level I) ^
 52. Bung P, Bung C, Artal R, Khodiguian N, Fallenstein F, 
Spatling L. Therapeutic exercise for insulin-requiring 
gestational diabetics: effects on the fetus—results of a 
randomized prospective longitudinal study. J Perinat 
Med 1993;21:125–37. (Level I) ^
 53. Halse RE, Wallman KE, Newnham JP, Guelfi KJ. Home-
based exercise training improves capillary glucose profile 
in women with gestational diabetes. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc 2014;46:1702–9. (Level I) ^
 54. Anjana RM, Sudha V, Lakshmipriya N, Anitha C, 
Unnikrishnan R, Bhavadharini B, et al. Physical activ-
ity patterns and gestational diabetes outcomes - the 
wings project. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2016;116:253–62. 
(Level II-3) ^
 55. Davenport MH, Mottola MF, McManus R, Gratton R. 
A walking intervention improves capillary glucose con- 
trol in women with gestational diabetes mellitus: a 
pilot study. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2008;33:511–7. 
(Level II-2) ^
 56. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Therapeutic 
management, delivery, and postpartum risk assessment 
and screening in gestational diabetes. Evidence Report/
Technology Assessment No. 162. Rockville (MD): 
AHRQ; 2008. (Systematic Review) ^
 57. Herrera KM, Rosenn BM, Foroutan J, Bimson BE, Al 
Ibraheemi Z, Moshier EL, et al. Randomized controlled 
trial of insulin detemir versus NPH for the treatment of 
pregnant women with diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2015;213:426.e1–7. (Level I) ^
 58. Koren R, Toledano Y, Hod M. The use of insulin detemir 
during pregnancy: a safety evaluation. Expert Opin Drug 
Saf 2015;14:593–9. (Level III) ^
 59. Lv S, Wang J, Xu Y. Safety of insulin analogs dur-
ing pregnancy: a meta-analysis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 
2015;292:749–56. (Meta-analysis) ^
 60. Zinman B, Tildesley H, Chiasson JL, Tsui E, Strack 
T. Insulin lispro in CSII: results of a double-blind 
crossover study [published erratum appears in Diabetes 
1997;46:1239]. Diabetes 1997;46:440–3. (Level II-3) ^
 61. Anderson JH Jr, Brunelle RL, Koivisto VA, Pfutzner A, 
Trautmann ME, Vignati L, et al. Reduction of postpran-
dial hyperglycemia and frequency of hypoglycemia in 
IDDM patients on insulin-analog treatment. Multicenter 
Insulin Lispro Study Group. Diabetes 1997;46:265–70. 
(Level II-3) ^

e62 Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY
 62. Camelo Castillo W, Boggess K, Sturmer T, Brookhart 
MA, Benjamin DK Jr, Jonsson Funk M. Trends in 
glyburide compared with insulin use for gestational dia-
betes treatment in the United States, 2000-2011. Obstet 
Gynecol 2014;123:1177–84. (Level II-3) ^
 63. De Leo V, Musacchio MC, Piomboni P, Di Sabatino A, 
Morgante G. The administration of metformin during 
pregnancy reduces polycystic ovary syndrome related 
gestational complications. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod 
Biol 2011;157:63–6. (Level II-2) ^
 64. Eyal S, Easterling TR, Carr D, Umans JG, Miodovnik 
M, Hankins GD, et al. Pharmacokinetics of metformin 
during pregnancy. Drug Metab Dispos 2010;38:833–40. 
(Level II-3) ^
 65. Wouldes TA, Battin M, Coat S, Rush EC, Hague WM, 
Rowan JA. Neurodevelopmental outcome at 2 years in 
offspring of women randomised to metformin or insulin 
treatment for gestational diabetes. Arch Dis Child Fetal 
Neonatal Ed 2016;101:F488–F493. (Level I) ^
 66. Rowan JA, Hague WM, Gao W, Battin MR, Moore MP. 
Metformin versus insulin for the treatment of gestational 
diabetes.  MiG Trial Investigators [published erratum 
appears in N Engl J Med 2008;359:106]. N Engl J Med 
2008;358:2003–15. (Level I) ^
 67. Spaulonci CP, Bernardes LS, Trindade TC, Zugaib M, 
Francisco RP. Randomized trial of metformin vs insulin 
in the management of gestational diabetes. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 2013;209:34.e1–7. (Level I) ^
 68. Balsells M, Garcia-Patterson A, Sola I, Roque M, Gich 
I, Corcoy R. Glibenclamide, metformin, and insulin for 
the treatment of gestational diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. BMJ 2015;350:h102. (Meta-analysis) 
^
 69. Poolsup N, Suksomboon N, Amin M. Efficacy and 
safety of oral antidiabetic drugs in comparison to insulin 
in treating gestational diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis. 
PLoS One 2014;9:e109985. (Meta-analysis) ^
 70. Farrar D, Simmonds M, Bryant M, Sheldon TA, Tuffnell 
D, Golder S, et al. Treatments for gestational diabe-
tes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 
2017;7:e015557. (Systematic Review and Meta-analysis) ^
 71. Butalia S, Gutierrez L, Lodha A, Aitken E, Zakariasen A, 
Donovan L. Short- and long-term outcomes of metformin 
compared with insulin alone in pregnancy: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Diabet Med 2017;34:27–36. 
(Systematic Review and Meta-analysis) ^
 72. Song R, Chen L, Chen Y, Si X, Liu Y, Liu Y, et al. 
Comparison of glyburide and insulin in the manage-
ment of gestational diabetes: a meta-analysis. PLoS One 
2017;12:e0182488. (Meta-analysis) ^
 73. Langer O, Conway DL, Berkus MD, Xenakis EM, 
Gonzales O. A comparison of glyburide and insulin in 
women with gestational diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 
2000;343:1134–8. (Level I) ^
 74. Anjalakshi C, Balaji V, Balaji MS, Seshiah V. A pro-
spective study comparing insulin and glibenclamide in 
gestational diabetes mellitus in Asian Indian women. 
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2007;76:474–5. (Level I) ^
 75. Lain KY, Garabedian MJ, Daftary A, Jeyabalan A. 
Neonatal adiposity following maternal treatment of ges-
tational diabetes with glyburide compared with insulin. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2009;200:501.e1–6. (Level I) ^
 76. Langer O, Yogev Y, Xenakis EM, Rosenn B. Insulin and 
glyburide therapy: dosage, severity level of gestational 
diabetes, and pregnancy outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2005;192:134–9. (Level II-3) ^
 77. Jacobson GF, Ramos GA, Ching JY, Kirby RS, Ferrara 
A, Field DR. Comparison of glyburide and insulin for 
the management of gestational diabetes in a large man-
aged care organization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2005;193: 
118–24. (Level II-3) ^
 78. Chmait R, Dinise T, Moore T. Prospective observa-
tional study to establish predictors of glyburide success 
in women with gestational diabetes mellitus. J Perinatol 
2004;24:617–22. (Level II-3) ^
 79. Kahn SE, Haffner SM, Heise MA, Herman WH, Holman 
RR, Jones NP, et al. Glycemic durability of rosigli-
tazone, metformin, or glyburide monotherapy.  ADOPT 
Study Group [published erratum appears in N Engl 
J Med 2007;356:1387-8]. N Engl J Med 2006;355: 
2427–43. (Level I) ^
 80. Rochon M, Rand L, Roth L, Gaddipati S. Glyburide 
for the management of gestational diabetes: risk factors 
predictive of failure and associated pregnancy outcomes. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2006;195:1090–4. (Level II-3) ^
 81. Cheng YW, Chung JH, Block-Kurbisch I, Inturrisi M, 
Caughey AB. Treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus: 
glyburide compared to subcutaneous insulin therapy and 
associated perinatal outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 
Med 2012;25:379–84. (Level II-2) ^
 82. Hebert MF, Ma X, Naraharisetti SB, Krudys KM, 
Umans JG, Hankins GD, et al. Are we optimizing ges-
tational diabetes treatment with glyburide? The pharma-
cologic basis for better clinical practice. Obstetric-Fetal 
Pharmacology Research Unit Network. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther 2009;85:607–14. (Level III) ^
 83. Moore LE, Clokey D, Rappaport VJ, Curet LB. Metformin 
compared with glyburide in gestational diabetes: a ran-
domized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 2010;115:55–9. 
(Level I) ^
 84. Camelo Castillo W, Boggess K, Sturmer T, Brookhart 
MA, Benjamin DK Jr, Jonsson Funk M. Association of 
adverse pregnancy outcomes with glyburide vs insulin 
in women with gestational diabetes. JAMA Pediatr 
2015;169:452–8. (Level II-3) ^
 85. Vanky E, Zahlsen K, Spigset O, Carlsen SM. Placental 
passage of metformin in women with polycystic ovary 
syndrome. Fertil Steril 2005;83:1575–8. (Level III) ^
 86. Brown J, Grzeskowiak L, Williamson K, Downie MR, 
Crowther CA. Insulin for the treatment of women with ges-
tational diabetes. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
2017, Issue 11. Art. No.: CD012037. (Systematic Review) ^
 87. Antepartum fetal surveillance. Practice Bulletin No. 145. 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Obstet Gynecol 2014;124:182–92. (Level III) ^
 88. Spong CY, Mercer BM, D’alton M, Kilpatrick S, 
Blackwell S, Saade G. Timing of indicated late-preterm 

VOL. 131, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2018 
Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus e63
 99. Esakoff TF, Cheng YW, Sparks TN, Caughey AB. 
The association between birthweight 4000 g or greater 
and perinatal outcomes in patients with and without 
gestational diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2009;200:672.e1–4. (Level II-2) ^
 100. Scifres CM, Feghali M, Dumont T, Althouse AD, 
Speer P, Caritis SN, et al. Large-for-gestational-age 
ultrasound diagnosis and risk for cesarean delivery 
in women with gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet 
Gynecol 2015;126:978–86. (Level II-2) ^
 101. Rouse DJ, Owen J, Goldenberg RL, Cliver SP. The 
effectiveness and costs of elective cesarean delivery 
for fetal macrosomia diagnosed by ultrasound. JAMA 
1996;276:1480–6. (Level II-3) ^
 102. Garabedian C, Deruelle P. Delivery (timing, route, 
peripartum glycemic control) in women with gestational 
diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Metab 2010;36:515–21. 
(Level III) ^
 103. Fetal macrosomia. Practice Bulletin No. 173. American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet 
Gynecol 2016;128:e195–209. (Level III) ^
 104. Kaaja RJ, Greer IA. Manifestations of chronic disease 
during pregnancy. JAMA 2005;294:2751–7. (Level III) 
^ 
 105. Buchanan TA, Xiang AH. Gestational diabetes mellitus. 
J Clin Invest 2005;115:485–91. (Level III) ^
 106. Russell MA, Phipps MG, Olson CL, Welch HG, Carpenter 
MW. Rates of postpartum glucose testing after gesta-
tional diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 2006;108:1456–
62. (Level II-2) ^
 107. Chodick G, Elchalal U, Sella T, Heymann AD, Porath A, 
Kokia E, et al. The risk of overt diabetes mellitus among 
women with gestational diabetes: a population-based 
study. Diabet Med 2010;27:779–85. (Level II-3) ^
 108. Bellamy L, Casas JP, Hingorani AD, Williams D. Type 2 
diabetes mellitus after gestational diabetes: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2009;373:1773–9. 
(Meta-analysis) ^
 109. Metzger BE, Buchanan TA, Coustan DR, de Leiva A, 
Dunger DB, Hadden DR, et al. Summary and recommen-
dations of the Fifth International Workshop-Conference 
on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus [published erratum 
appears in Diabetes Care 2007;30:3154]. Diabetes Care 
2007;30 Suppl 2:S251–60. (Level III) ^
and early-term birth. Obstet Gynecol 2011;118:323–33. 
(Level III) ^
 89. Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term deliv-
eries. Committee Opinion No. 560. American College 
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 
2013;121:908–10. (Level III) ^
 90. Alberico S, Erenbourg A, Hod M, Yogev Y, Hadar E, 
Neri F, et al. Immediate delivery or expectant manage-
ment in gestational diabetes at term: the GINEXMAL 
randomised controlled trial. GINEXMAL Group. BJOG 
2017;124:669–77. (Level I) ^
 91. Kjos SL, Henry OA, Montoro M, Buchanan TA, 
Mestman JH. Insulin-requiring diabetes in pregnancy: 
a randomized trial of active induction of labor and 
expectant management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;169: 
611–5. (Level I) ^
 92. Lurie S, Insler V, Hagay ZJ. Induction of labor at 38 to 
39 weeks of gestation reduces the incidence of shoulder 
dystocia in gestational diabetic patients class A2. Am J 
Perinatol 1996;13:293–6. (Level II-3) ^
 93. Witkop CT, Neale D, Wilson LM, Bass EB, Nicholson 
WK. Active compared with expectant delivery manage-
ment in women with gestational diabetes: a systematic 
review. Obstet Gynecol 2009;113:206–17. (Systematic 
Review) ^
 94. Melamed N, Ray JG, Geary M, Bedard D, Yang C, 
Sprague A, et al. Induction of labor before 40 weeks is 
associated with lower rate of cesarean delivery in women 
with gestational diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2016;214:364.e1–8. (Level II-2) ^
 95. Niu B, Lee VR, Cheng YW, Frias AE, Nicholson JM, 
Caughey AB. What is the optimal gestational age for 
women with gestational diabetes type A1 to deliver? Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 2014;211:418.e1–6. (Level III) ^
 96. Caughey AB, Valent AM. When to deliver women with 
diabetes in pregnancy? Am J Perinatol 2016;33:1250–4. 
(Level III) ^
 97. Acker DB, Sachs BP, Friedman EA. Risk factors 
for shoulder dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 1985;66:762–8. 
(Level II-3) ^
 98. Langer O, Berkus MD, Huff RW, Samueloff A. Shoulder 
dystocia: should the fetus weighing greater than or equal 
to 4000 grams be delivered by cesarean section? Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1991;165:831–7. (Level II-3) ^

e64 Practice Bulletin Gestational Diabetes Mellitus 
OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY
Copyright February 2018 by the American College of Ob ste-
tri cians and Gynecologists. All rights reserved. No part of this 
publication may be reproduced, stored in a re triev al sys tem, 
posted on the Internet, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, elec tron ic, me chan i cal, photocopying, recording, or 
oth er wise, without prior written permission from the publisher.
Requests for authorization to make photocopies should be 
directed to Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, 
Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
409 12th Street, SW, PO Box 96920, Washington, DC 20090-6920
Gestational diabetes mellitus. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 190. 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet Gyne-
col 2018;131:e49–64.
This information is designed as an educational resource to aid clinicians in providing obstetric and gynecologic care, and use of this information is vol-
untary. This information should not be considered as inclusive of all proper treatments or methods of care or as a statement of the standard of care. It is 
not intended to substitute for the independent professional judgment of the treating clinician. Variations in practice may be warranted when, in the reason-
able judgment of the treating clinician, such course of action is indicated by the condition of the patient, limitations of available resources, or advances in 
knowledge or technology. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists reviews its publications regularly; however, its publications may not 
reflect the most recent evidence. Any updates to this document can be found on www.acog.org or by calling the ACOG Resource Center.
While ACOG makes every effort to present accurate and reliable information, this publication is provided “as is” without any warranty of accuracy, reli-
ability, or otherwise, either express or implied. ACOG does not guarantee, warrant, or endorse the products or services of any firm, organization, or person. 
Neither ACOG nor its officers, directors, members, employees, or agents will be liable for any loss, damage, or claim with respect to any liabilities, including 
direct, special, indirect, or consequential damages, incurred in connection with this publication or reliance on the information presented.
The MEDLINE database, the Cochrane Library, and 
ACOG’s own internal resources and documents were used 
to con duct a lit er a ture search to lo cate rel e vant ar ti cles 
pub lished be tween January 1990 and May 2017. The search 
was re strict ed to ar ti cles pub lished in the English lan guage. 
Pri or i ty was given to articles re port ing results of orig i nal 
re search, although re view ar ti cles and com men tar ies also 
were consulted. Ab stracts of re search pre sent ed at sym po-
sia and sci en tif ic con fer enc es were not con sid ered adequate 
for in clu sion in this doc u ment. Guide lines pub lished by 
or ga ni za tions or in sti tu tions such as the Na tion al In sti tutes 
of Health and the Amer i can Col lege of Ob ste tri cians and 
Gy ne col o gists were re viewed, and ad di tion al studies were 
located by re view ing bib liographies of identified articles. 
When re li able research was not available, expert opinions 
from ob ste tri cian–gynecologists were used.
Studies were reviewed and evaluated for qual i ty ac cord ing 
to the method outlined by the U.S. Pre ven tive Services 
Task Force:
I 
Evidence obtained from at least one prop er ly 
de signed randomized controlled trial.
II-1 Evidence obtained from well-designed con trolled 
tri als without randomization.
II-2 Evidence obtained from well-designed co hort or 
case–control analytic studies, pref er a bly from more 
than one center or research group.
II-3 Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or 
with out the intervention. Dra mat ic re sults in un con-
trolled ex per i ments also could be regarded as this 
type of ev i dence.
III 
Opinions of respected authorities, based on clin i cal 
ex pe ri ence, descriptive stud ies, or re ports of ex pert 
committees.
Based on the highest level of evidence found in the data, 
recommendations are provided and grad ed ac cord ing to the 
following categories:
Level A—Recommendations are based on good and con-
sis tent sci en tif ic evidence.
Level B—Recommendations are based on limited or in con-
sis tent scientific evidence.
Level C—Recommendations are based primarily on con-
sen sus and expert opinion.